# 2.3.0 - Launching programs and creating aliases

## clear

Sometimes the output on the screen might make things too garbled or difficult to read. Specially if you are listing many different files.

You can easily clear the screen contents with the **clear** command.

```text
$ clear
```

We will be seeing later on some keyboard shortcuts but you can achieve the same result with the keyboard combination of **Ctrl-L**.

## Using the \[TAB\] key

The Bash shell has an autocompletion feature that is triggered with the tab key.

When you are typing a command, file or directory name, you can press the TAB key to autocomplete.

For example, type **l** and immediately after press TAB:

```text
$ l[TAB]
Display all 126 possibilities? (y or n)
```

There are 126 commands that start with the letter l. The more characters you type the lower the options will and also the way those options are displayed:

```text
$ ls[TAB]
ls           lsblk        lshw         lslocks      lsmod        lspci        lsusb        
lsar         lsb_release  lsinitramfs  lslogins     lsns         lspcmcia     
lsattr       lscpu        lsipc        lsmem        lsof         lspgpot
```

After you press the TAB the shell still expects you to press ENTER before accepting the commands. You can always delete and try again.

TAB will also autocomplete file and directory names. Experiment with it because it will save you a lot of typing.

## echo

In the first example, when you pressed the TAB key to autocomplete it showed that there were 126 matches. This is a huge list of commands. Those are all commands that are in your PATH variable. This works exactly the same as in DOS/Windows, when you type a command the directories that are in your PATH variable are searched and if that command is found, it is executed.

You can use the **echo** command to display messages, but also to show the value of system variables. System variables are traditionally uppercase.

```text
$ echo $PATH
/usr/local/sbin:/usr/local/bin:/usr/sbin:/usr/bin:/sbin:/bin:/usr/games:/usr/local/games:/snap/bin
```

The result of the command shows all of the directories where commands and programs are searched for execution.

The other usage for **echo** is to display messages:

```text
$ echo Hello
Hello
```

This doesn't look very useful at the moment, but if you develop shell scripts later on, you might want to display a message upon completion or when a certain action is taking place.

## Launching programs

We saw before that the $PATH variable indicates which directories are searched when you type a command.

Linux/Unix won't execute a program in the local folder like DOS/Windows does. Unless the directory is in the $PATH variable you need to explicitly indicate you want to execute a program.

This is done for security reasons. An attacker could create a program in a directory with the same name as a commonly invoked program and trick an administrator into executing it without realising that it is a local and malicious program.

If you want to execute a program and you want to explicitly indicate that it is a local one you will need to add **./** in the front.

Remember the directory reference characters from section 2.1? We used **..** for the directory above the current one and we mentioned **.** for the current directory.

This is what the dot in **./** indicates, the local directory. The forward slash **/** is to separate the directory from the file name, as you do with any path name that contains at least one directory and file.

So, to execute a a program in the local directory you will add the **./** in front:

```text
$ cd /bin
$ ./lsusb
[...]
```

**./lsusb** will execute the program called _lsusb_ in the local folder \(/bin\)which lists your USB devices. This command will be seen in more detail later on, right now it is only used as an example on how to execute a program in your current directory.

If you also recall we spoke about relative and absolute paths. The **./** invocation is a relative path. You can use an absolute path to execute a program without having to change directories or if you want to execute a specific version, in case that more than one version is installed.

```text
$ cd
$ /bin/lsusb
[...]
```

The above example executes the same program but without being in the same directory by using the absolute path.

## file

The command **file** will allow you to know what a file type is.

We have mentioned that in Unix/Linux file extensions aren't necessary. They are still used but not always. That means that many files don't have a file extension.

You can use **file** to get information about what type of file a given one is:

```text
$ file /bin/lsusb
/bin/lsusb: ELF 64-bit LSB shared object, x86-64, version 1 (SYSV), dynamically linked, interpreter /lib64/ld-linux-x86-64.so.2, BuildID[sha1]=3a9a52954527a4faa60a90b2388a9964c85e7bba, for GNU/Linux 3.2.0, stripped

$ file /etc/fstab 
/etc/fstab: ASCII text
```

In the above example one file is 64 bit executable and the other is a text file.

## Aliases

The last command we will learn in this section is **alias**.

**alias** allows you to create an alias for one or more commands. Without arguments it will display the existing aliases.

```text
$ alias
alias egrep='egrep --color=auto'
alias fgrep='fgrep --color=auto'
alias grep='grep --color=auto'
alias l='ls -CF'
alias la='ls -A'
alias ll='ls -alF'
alias ls='ls --color=auto'
```

Your output might differ depending on the Linux distro you are using. This example shows the aliases on my system.

We will create a new alias to list all files in human readable format:

```text
 $ alias .='ls -lh'
```

Now when I type **.** it will execute the alias I have just created:

```text
$ . /bin/lsusb 
-rwxr-xr-x 1 root root 243K Oct  1  2019 /bin/lsusb
```

You can edit an existing alias by just re-issuing:

```text
 $ alias .='ls -gh'
 $ . /bin/lsusb 
-rwxr-xr-x 1 root 243K Oct  1  2019 /bin/lsusb
```

Aliases are only valid for the current session unless they are stored. We won't be looking at this yet.

If you want to remove an alias you can use **unalias**:

```text
$ alias
alias .='ls -gh'
alias egrep='egrep --color=auto'
alias fgrep='fgrep --color=auto'
alias grep='grep --color=auto'
alias l='ls -CF'
alias la='ls -A'
alias ll='ls -alF'
alias ls='ls --color=auto'
$ unalias .
$ alias
alias egrep='egrep --color=auto'
alias fgrep='fgrep --color=auto'
alias grep='grep --color=auto'
alias l='ls -CF'
alias la='ls -A'
alias ll='ls -alF'
alias ls='ls --color=auto'
```

In my output **ls** is an alias of the command of the same name. You can do this and it won't clash. Aliases will be executed ahead of the command if the names match. This can be useful if you want to force certain arguments on a command by default.

> alias ls='ls --color=auto'

If you want **ls** to be the command rather than the alias you can **unalias** it, but sometimes you just want the unaliased command temporarily.

You can achieve this by executing the command with a in front. This will tell the console that the command should be executed unaliased.

```text
$ \ls
Desktop  Documents  Downloads  Images  Music  Pictures  Public  Templates  Videos
```

The only difference in this instance is that the unaliased **ls** won't colourise the output.

