# 2.1 - Moving around directories
---------------------------------

## Console prompt
When you first open your terminal you will be greeted with a prompt similar to this:

```shell
david@tuxedo:~$ 
```
This will vary from one Linux distribution to another and you shouldn't worry too much if it looks different to your console, at least for now.

The first part **david@tuxedo** shows the current user and the machine name. It is just a way of saying that this console is currently logged with user _david_ at a machine called _tuxedo_.

The **~** is an alias for the current user's home folder. If you change folders this part of the prompt will be updated if your console is configured in that way.

The **:** is a separator between the machine name and the current directory you are in.

The **$** is the the command prompt for the Bash shell. All the commands that you type will be after this **$**.

I will be showing the **$** in my examples for convention but you don't have to type it when you enter your commands. Console output in the examples won't have the **$** prompt.

I will not show the user or machine name and current directory before the **$** prompt in the rest of the course unless relevant.

## Current Directory
The first command you will type is **pwd**. It stands for _print working directory_ or in another words, display the directory I currently am in.

```shell
$ pwd
/home/david
```
After typing **pwd** the console replies with _/home/david/_ as the folder I am currently in. In Linux user folders are generally stored in _/home/_.

Your username will match the one you created when you installed the OS. In the examples below I will be using a _username_ called _david_.

You can change folders with the **cd** which stands for _change directory_.

```shell
$ cd Desktop
```
The **cd** command followed by the folder you want to change will take you to that directory. Check the current directory with **pwd**:

```shell
$ pwd
/home/david/Desktop
```

## The root directory
We saw earlier that **~** is the current user's home folder. The **/** represents the _root folder_. In Unix and Linux all folders and devices start in the root folder. We will look at the Linux folder structure in more detail later on.

You can use **/** as a way to directly reach the root folder:

```shell
$ cd /
$ pwd
/
```

You might have noticed already, but Linux and nearly any other Unix derived OS is case sensitive. If you have files or directories called _Linux_, _linux_ and _linuX_ they will all be treated as different files.

You can use a command like **cd ~** to go back to your home folder, but Unix is about efficiency. If you just type **cd** on its own it will bring you to your home folder:

```shell
$ pwd
/
$ cd
$ pwd
/home/david/
```

## Types of paths
There are two kinds of paths used when working with directories:

* Relative paths
* Absolute paths

A _relative path_ is a path relative to your current location. For example, the above **cd Desktop** command moved you to a directory called **Desktop** from the current directory you were in.

An _absolute path_ is the full path to any given directory. For example:

```shell
$ cd /home/david/Desktop
$ pwd
/home/david/Desktop
```

Full paths aren't ambiguous and will always bring you to the folder you want to be. They will always start with the root directory **/**.

Note that the **/** is also used to separate directories and subdirectories, like in _/home/david/Desktop_. In this case meaning _root directory_, _home_ directory, _david_ subdirectory, _Desktop_ subdirectory. 


## Other directory reference characters
There are other interesting shortcuts that you will have to use often.

If you want to move back one directory you will use **..**. The two dots are a reference for the directory directly above the current one. The **.** or single dot is a reference for the current directory you are in. You will never need to use it with **cd**, as **cd .** would just leave you in the same directory you currently are. The **.** will become very useful in the future when working with other commands.

```shell
$ pwd
/home/david
$ cd ..
$ pwd
/home
```
You can also use **cd ..** to change to a directory parallel to the one you are in one go:

```shell
$ cd
$ cd Desktop
$ pwd
/home/david/Desktop
$ cd ../Downloads
$ pwd
/home/david/Downloads
```

Or go down several levels in one go:

```shell
$ cd
$ cd Desktop
$ pwd
/home/david/Desktop
$ cd ../..
$ pwd
/home
```

You can use **cd -** to back to the directory you were previously:

```shell
$ cd
$ pwd
/home/david
$ cd Desktop
$ pwd
/home/david/Desktop
$ cd -
/home/david
```

## Using wildcards
**cd** also allows you to use wildcards to change directories if you don't know its full name.

For example:

```shell
$ pwd
/home/david
$ cd /home/david/De*
$ pwd
/home/david/Desktop
```

As long as there isn't more than one directory that matches the string, it will change to the matching directory.

Otherwise you will get an error:

```shell
$ cd
$ cd /home/david/D*
bash: cd: too many arguments
```

## Home folders
We already saw that **~** is a reference for the current user's home directory.

You can change to the home directory of a given user by using the **~username** reference:

```shell
$ cd
$ pwd
/home/david
$ cd ~peter
$ pwd
/home/peter
$ cd ~david
$ pwd
/home/david
```

We already mentioned that normally all user directories are in _/home_. The only exception is the _root account_ or superuser. The _root account_ home directory is in **/root**.

Note that the _root directory_ (**/**) isn't the same as the _root account_ home directory (**/root**).


## Key Points

### Commands
```shell
pwd		Print Working Directory
cd 		Change Directory
```

### Concepts
```
Absolute paths
Relative paths
```

### Folder references
```
.	Current directory
..	Directory above current one
~	Current user home directory
/	Root directory
```

### Shortcuts
```
cd				Move to your home directory 

cd ~username	Move to home dir of 'username'

cd -			Move back to the dir you were previously 

cd /home/d*		Move to the folder starting with d in /home
```

## Further reading

* _Robbins, Arnold_. **Bash Pocket Reference**, O'Reilly, 2010. **Pages 1-8**

* _Ward, Brian_. **How Linux Works, 2nd edition**, No Starch Press, 2015. **Chapter 2**

* _Negus, Christopher_. **Linux Bible, 9th edition**, Wiley, 2015. **Chapters 3 and 4**

* _Blum, Richard; Bresnahan, Christine_. **Linux Command Line and Shell Scripting Bible, 3rd edition**, Wiley, 2015. **Chapters 3, 5 and 23**