# 2.2 - Listing files
---------------------

Before we start looking at more commands a brief note on their syntax.

All commands in Unix and Linux follow a similar pattern:

```
command [options] [arguments]
```

Not all commands need options or arguments, others might require them both, but in general the above pattern holds true for a majority of them.


## ls
**ls** stands for _list_. It will list the contents of a folder.

```shell
$ cd
$ ls
Desktop     Documents   Images  Pictures    snap
Templates   Downloads   Music   Public      Videos
```

**ls** can be used to list files in a different directory to the one you are if you use that directory as an argument:

```shell
$ cd
$ ls /sbin
[..]
```

## The zero or more characters wildcard *
Some commands accept the use of wilcards. We are going to see some examples with **ls**, but there are more commands, specially the ones that are used to manipulate files and directories that accept them.

```shell
$ ls *
Desktop:
 trash.desktop
Documents:
Downloads:
[...]
```

In Linux the * stands for everything, in reality it stands for matching any number of characters, but for this example you can assume that it means everything. 

You might be familiar with **`*.*`** in DOS/Windows to list all files. Linux and Unix don't need files to have an extension  so **`ls *`** is enough.

**`ls *.*`** would list files in the current directory that contain a dot.

```shell
$ ls
Desktop     Documents   Images  Pictures    snap
Templates   Downloads   Music   Public      Videos

$ ls *
Desktop:
 trash.desktop
Documents:
Downloads:
[...]

$ ls *.*
ls: cannot access '*.*': No such file or directory
```

Note the difference in output between using `*.*` and *.  When `*.*` is used **ls** doesn't find any files containing a dot in the name and shows an error message.

The * wildcard is very versatile, as it stands for any number of characters (including zero) you can create strings like:

To list all files starting with the string foo:

```shell
$ ls foo*
```

Or all files ending with foo:

```shell
$ ls *foo
```

Strictly speaking, for the above examples if there was to be a file just called "foo" the above two commands would find this file it would match both criterias. The idea in any case is that you will be likely be using * to search for files with partial matches like above.

You can also list files that contain the string foo using * on both ends:

```shell
$ ls `*foo*`
```

One last very useful example is to use * for a whole directory. For example, if I wanted to list the files in the Downloads directory of all the users in my system I would be doing something like:

```shell
$ ls /home/david/Desktop
$ ls /home/alice/Desktop
$ ls /home/bob/Desktop
[...]
```

Doing it this way would be very time consuming. You can use * to just list all in one go:

```shell
$ ls /home/*/Desktop
[...]
```

Just note that the above will show a permissions error as standard users can't access other users' directories, but an administrator would be able to issue a command like that. 


## The single character wildcard ?
Where the * represented any number of characters, the **?** represents a single character.

This can be very interesting because you can issue commands that will list files with a specific number of characters:

```shell
$ ls ?oo
```

The above will list all files that are exactly 3 characters in length and of which the last two characters are oo.

You can use the **?** several times or just on its own.

List all files that are four characters long and that start with s in /bin:

```shell
$ ls /bin/s???
/bin/sddm  /bin/shuf  /bin/snap  /bin/stat  /bin/sudo  /bin/sync
/bin/sftp  /bin/size  /bin/sort  /bin/stty  /bin/svlc
```

Or just list all files that are three characters long in /sbin:

```shell
$ ls /sbin/???
/sbin/lpc  /sbin/rmt  /sbin/ufw  /sbin/zed  /sbin/zic
/sbin/raw  /sbin/tor  /sbin/zdb  /sbin/zfs
```

You can also mix different wildcards together:

```shell
 $ ls /bin/?g*
/bin/egrep          /bin/ngettext  /bin/sg      /bin/xgc
/bin/fgconsole      /bin/pgrep     /bin/tgz     /bin/zgrep
/bin/fgrep          /bin/qgltf     /bin/wget
/bin/kglobalaccel5  /bin/rgrep     /bin/xgamma
```
The above example will list all the files which its second character is g.

If you wanted to search for files that end with a specific character you can use * on its own. For example, all the files that finish in z in /bin:

```shell
$ ls /bin/*z
/bin/7z  /bin/lz  /bin/tgz  /bin/unxz  /bin/uz  /bin/xz
```

But you will need to use ? if you want to find all the files whose name have a z in the second to last character:

```shell
$ ls /bin/*z?
/bin/7za               /bin/python3-pasteurize
/bin/7zr               /bin/size
/bin/futurize          /bin/systemd-analyze
/bin/lz4               /bin/unlz4
/bin/pasteurize        /bin/x86_64-linux-gnu-size
/bin/python3-futurize
```

Obviously these examples might come across as weird but the point isn't about memorising everything. At this stage, if you are just starting with Linux, you just need to be aware that these kind of searches and selections are possible.

You can always come back and look things up if you get stuck (even experienced users do it!).

With time and practice these commands will become more natural so don't worry too much about learning everything in one go. 


## The range wildcard []
The last wildcard I will show you is the range. This one is similar to **?** but it will allow you to select a range of valid values.

For example, if you want to list all the files that start with a, b or c in /bin:

```shell
$ ls /bin/[abc]*
[...]
```

Remember that Linux is case-sensitive, so the above example would only work with files that start with a lowercase a, b or c.

Also, each range **[]** stands for a single character. You are just defining what are the range of characters you want to match.

The syntax for a range can be done in several ways. Some, but not all of them, are interchangeable:

```
[abc]   Characters a, b or c

[a,b,c] Characters a, b or c

[a-c]   Characters a to c

[a-b,d] Characters a to b and d
```

Ranges can also be used as an exclusion:

```
[!abc]   Any characters except a, b or c

[!a,b,c] Any characters except a, b or c

[!a-c]   Any characters not in range a to c

[!a-b,d] Any characters except a to b and d
```

When you mix all of the above you can generate very powerful and specific search strings.

For example, let's search for all files which its second character is a vowel and last character is a number in /bin:

```shell
$ ls /bin/?[aeiou]*[0-9]
/bin/base32          /bin/kiconfinder5  /bin/pinentry-gnome3
/bin/base64          /bin/kioclient5    /bin/pinentry-x11
/bin/bunzip2         /bin/linux32       /bin/ping4
/bin/diff3           /bin/linux64       /bin/ping6
/bin/foo2hbpl2       /bin/meinproc5     /bin/qaptworker3
/bin/keditfiletype5  /bin/perl5.30.0    /bin/uic3
```

Or all the files that start with an a and the second character isn't a vowel and fourth character is in the range p to z in /bin:

```shell
$ ls /bin/a[!aeiou]?[p-z]*
/bin/addpart    /bin/appres        /bin/apturl-gtk
/bin/addr2line  /bin/appstreamcli  /bin/aseqdump
/bin/amixer     /bin/apturl        /bin/aseqnet
```

## This is what Unix is about
All of this is a fine example of the Unix philosophy at work. A program will do one thing and one thing only, and it will do it really well.

**ls** is responsible to list files, a job that it does remarkably well. 

The command has many different arguments divided in three areas:

* **F**ormatting
* **S**orting
* **I**nformation displayed

Just see a selectin of available arguments:

**Formatting**

Command | Type | Description
--------|------|------------
ls | I | list files
ls -l | FI | long listing format (will also sort alphabetically)
ls -la | FI | long listing format and all files (including hidden)
ls -lA |FI | don't list . and ..
ls -l –author | I | show the author of each file
ls -lsk | I | use kibibytes as the size unit
ls -1 | F | list one file per line
ls -d | I | list directories, not their content
ls -e | I | show ACLs (macOS)
ls -@ | I | display extended attribute keys (macOS)
ls -f | F | don't sort (enable -aU, disable -ls –color)
\ls | F | don't sort
ls -n| I | list numeric user and group IDs
ls -i | I | display the index number for each file
ls -m | F | display list of files in a line separated by commas
ls -tl | SI| sort by modification time, newest first
ls -u | S | sort by access time, newest first
ls -ult | FI | show and sort by access time
ls -ul | SI | show access time and sort by name
ls -U | S | do not sort, list entries in directory order
ls -X | S | sort alphabetically by entry extension
ls -c | S | sort by ctime, newest first
ls -clt | SI | show and sort by last modification date (ctime)
ls -cl |SI | show ctime and sort by name
ls --color=auto | F |
ls -C | F | list entries in a column
ls -x | F |list in lines instead of columns
ls -r | S |reverse order when sorting
ls -S | S | sort by file size, largest first
ls -Q | F |enclose names in double quotes
ls --full-time | I | display date with full detail
ls -g | I | long format showing group ownership but no file owner
ls -o | I | long format showing file owner but no group ownership
ls -lh | I | human readable file sizes in base 2
ls -l –si | I | human readable file sizes in base 10
ls --hide=PATTERN | F | do not display PATTERN in results
ls -lk | I | display size in kibibytes
ls -p | F | append the / symbol to the end of directories
ls -R | I | list contents of subdirectories recursively
ls -s | I | show the allocated size of each file in blocks
ls -F | I | append indicator (*	executable file, / directory, @	symbolic link /extended attributes, = socket, %	 whiteout, | FIFO whiteout,> doors (I believe Solaris only)

That is an very long list and it isn't complete but it illustrates the point that Unix is about specialised tools working together.

Right now it is only one command, but soon enough you will learn how to make commands interact with each other. That is the real power of the CLI. Each command is like a LEGO piece. On its own it can't do complicated builds, but the more pieces you have the more ellaborate and elegant they can be.

The above list isn't meant to be memorised. You only need to know that **ls** has many arguments that can help you list files you need, in a specific order, with a given format and the information of your choice.

## Key Points

### Commands
```shell
ls		List files
```

### Concepts
```
command [options] [arguments]
```

### Wilcards
```
*	Zero or more characters
?	One character
[]	Range of characters
```

### Ranges
```
[abc]   Characters a, b or c

[a,b,c] Characters a, b or c

[a-c]   Characters a to c

[a-b,d] Characters a to b and d

[!abc]   Any characters except a, b or c

[!a,b,c] Any characters except a, b or c

[!a-c]   Any characters not in range a to c

[!a-b,d] Any characters except a to b and d
```

### Unix philosopy
Individual specialised tools or programs that can easily interact between them to solve more complicated problems.


## Further reading
* _Robbins, Arnold_. **Bash Pocket Reference**, O'Reilly, 2010. **Pages 1-8**

* _Ward, Brian_. **How Linux Works, 2nd edition**, No Starch Press, 2015. **Chapter 2**

* _Negus, Christopher_. **Linux Bible, 9th edition**, Wiley, 2015. **Chapter 4**

* _Blum, Richard; Bresnahan, Christine_. **Linux Command Line and Shell Scripting Bible, 3rd edition**, Wiley, 2015. **Chapter 3 and 5**