# 1.4 - Software Licensing

## Copyright and software

Copyright law has existed for several centuries and although it was never designed to deal with software it has been and it is applied to it.

A copyright is a legally recognised right to create a copy of something. For example, if you write a book, take a photograph, make a video or write a program, in most jurisdictions you alone have the right to make copies of it. You can grant others a right to make those copies or handover the copyright to others.

Every country has different copyright laws but most countries are signatories of the Berne Convention. The convention enforces a requirement that member countries recognize copyrights held by the citizens of all other member countries. You can create your work in your home country and it will be automatically copyrighted in all the other member countries.

The main problem with copyright law is that it was written at a time computers didn't exist and they don't blend too well. Normally copyright law will forbid you to make a copy of a computer programs, but this isn't practical.

You need to make copies of your software to make it functional. For example:

* You might need to copy the software to your hard drive.
* When executed the program will have to be copied to RAM.
* There might be a copy of the program in some of the computer or hard drive caches.
* You might have backups of your hard drive that will include copies of the program.

Those copies would normally be considered fair use and be ignored. Some countries copyright law accepts that some software copies are necessary for it to be used.

## Modifying Copyright Terms Through Licences

Most software is released with a licence which is a document that modifies the rights granted by copyright law. You don't normally sign this licences, although you must be familiar with menus asking you to click a button to accept the licence terms. Before software distribution through the internet was prevalent software licences were a printed document accompanying the software.

Those licences are usually called End-User Licence Agreements \(EULAs\), shrink-wrap licences or click-though licences. Open Source software is distributed with the licence in the form of a file, normally called LICENSE or COPYING.

Software licences can modify copyright terms by making them more or less restrictive. Some licences tie the software to a single machine, which is a more restrictive term than standard copyright law.

The Linux kernel is distributed under the General Public Licence \(GPL\) which is a Free/Libre licence. The GPL grants you the right to redistribute the software both in source code and binary form. This kind of licence provides less restrictions than standard copyright law.

Usually proprietary software will be distributed with more restrictive licences and FLOSS with less restrictive ones, although this isn't always the case.

