# 1.0 - Introduction
--------------------

There are many tutorials and introductions to the Linux/Unix command line. Some of them focus on a basic set of commands or on the concepts needed to pass a certification.

I like it when the focus is on the practical side of learning. What can be effectively be applied at work.

The selection I have made covers areas and commands that any Linux user or sysadmin will use on a daily basis. You can see them as the building blocks for more advanced knowledge.

The first part covers some theory that will allow you to understand what Linux is and the philosophy behind it. It isn't compulsory to learn about it but it will help you better understand what the design principles and why certain things are done in a certain way.

I will be quite happy to hear any feedback, let me know about any typos so they can be corrected and feel free to take part if you want to.

## A note on console fonts
Consoles are configured by default with monospace fonts and that have clear and distinctive fonts.

The reason for this is that some characters with certain fonts are difficult to distinguish.

The clearest example are 1, I, l, 0 and O.

If this document has been rendered in a way that you can't differentiate between the above charactesrs please get an updates version or go to the course's website to get a different or updated version:

https://github.com/dpoves/Linux-CLI-intro


## Getting in touch
If you want to get in touch you can reach me via the following.

**Technical Blog**
https://pov.es

**GitHub**
https://github.com/dpoves

Any feedback is appreciated. If you find any typos, feel that certain sections aren't clear enough or find any mistakes, please let me me know.

I hope you find the course useful!