# 1.1 - Definition of an Operating System
-----------------------------------------

## What is an Operating System?
An Operating System (OS) provides the basic features of a computer. It allows you to use the hardware devices, provides a user interface and its standards and a set of basic tools that makes the computer useful.

Most of those basic features will be defined by the OS' kernel.

## What is a Kernel?
The kernel of an OS if the software component that is responsible for managing several low level features. They include:

- Interfacing with hardware devices.
- Allocating memory to programs.
- Allocating CPU time to programs.
- Allowing programs to interact with each other

When you run a program it does rely on the kernel for many of its basic functions. The kernel will allocate memory and CPU time to it. If needed, it will also give access to hardware and kernel services.

You can imagine the kernel as the part that holds the computer together. Without it the computer wouldn't be able to do much. 	

Different OS will use different kernels. macOS, Windows and Linux use different kernels and they aren't interchangeable.

Each kernel uses a different internal design and software interfaces for programs to use. Programs will be built to work with one specific kernel or kernel type.

Some programs can be made so they run in different types of kernel but they will still need different binaries for each OS.

## Linux kernel
Linux uses a kernel called Linux. Strictly speaking Linux is just the kernel. The full name of the OS is GNU/Linux. We will look into what makes Linux an OS later.

You can read more on the naming in this Wikipedia article:

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GNU/Linux_naming_controversy

Some of the features that you might associate with Linux, like the command line that we will be learning in here, are provided by command and programs that aren't part of the kernel.

Linus Torvalds created the Linux kernel in 1991, while he was still a student. The kernel has evolved considerably since. It runs on a wide variety of CPUs and hardware.

The easiest way to learn about Linux (as an OS) is to use it on a desktop or laptop computer

The Linux kernel, however, runs on everything from mobile phones to supercomputers.

## What else identifies an OS?
The kernel is at the core of any Operating System but it is a component most user don't manipulate directly.

Users would normally interact with other software components like:

* **Command line shells**
Many years ago users interacted with computers exclusively by typing commands in a program called a shell. The commands would allow to manipulate files, execute programs and so on. Many computer users don't use text based shells, but they are still important for intermmediate and advanced users. This course is exclusively about using the terminal and such programs. Many different shells are available. The most popular is the Bash shell, also known as Bourne Again Shell, although different distributions and operating systems might use their own variants.

* **Graphical User Interfaces**
GUIs rely on menus, icons and a mouse pointer. Each OS has their own graphical interface that makes it distinct. Linux relies on the X Window System as its GUI. X defines protocol and graphics primitives so additional software like window managers and desktop environments are used to provide a complete user experience. Linux has several available interfaces that can be installed separately.

* **Utility programs**
Nearly all OS come with a set of utilities or applications like text editors, calculators, maintenance tools and so on.

* **Libraries**
Libraries are collections of programming functions that provice critical services. They are used by nearly all programs. Normaly it will only be programmers that will need to work with them directly.

* **Productivity programs**
These would be programs like web browsers, word processors and similar. Most users will use computers to work with this kind of programs. This kind of programs are technically independent of the OS, but sometimes they are related to a specific one. For example, Microsoft Office on Windows. Although programs can be available for more than one OS they will vary due to the different OS and GUIs.

There are other things that will differentiate different OS. User management, disk naming conventions, init systems, etc.

## Building a Linux based Operating System
Taking into account all of the above, what does make Linux a complete OS?

These are some of the components that will make part of a full Linux Operating System (also called distro, short for distribution):

* **Linux kernel**
The kernel will be at the core of any Linux OS. The kernel is updated regularly and new versions come out roughly every 6-8 weeks.
Different distributions will be probably be using different versions.

* **Core Unix Tools**
The set of command line utilities included with the OS, the X Window System and Desktop Environment (if used) and other utilities that will come with the OS will vary between different distros, in some cases it will be just different versions, in some other cases some will be on one distro and not included on another.

* **Additional software**
Programs to run server services, productivity tools and similar will vary from one distro to another.

* **Init system**
How the OS is initialised and all the startup scripts can vary greatly. Linux uses an init system (init for initialisation) that will launch programs responsible for different functions like networking. The init system will give an OS part of its personality
Many distros have moved to _systemd_ but this has also been the source of much controversy and clashes.

* **Installer**
Depending on the distro you use the installation process and program used will vary. Some distros will use a text interface, others will use a graphical interface. Different distros might support different disk layouts and formats, they will set the first user accounts, etc.
Some installers will be a full and complete ISO image, others will provide a minimal configuration and rely on a connection to the Internet to download all the additional software.