# 1.2 - Unix/Linux Philosophy
-----------------------------

## The Unix philosophy
This is a summary from the Wikipedia's entry on Unix Philosophy (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_philosophy).

The Unix is a set of cultural norms and philosophical approaches to minimalist, modular software development.

Early Unix developers brought the concepts of modularity and re-usability into software engineering practice. Over time, the leading developers of Unix and associated programs established a set of cultural norms for developing software. These norms have been termed the "Unix philosophy."

It emphasises building **simple**, **short**, **clear**, **modular**, and **extensible** code that can be easily maintained and repurposed by developers other than its creators.

In essence, Unix development is:

* Write programs that do one thing and do it well.
* Write programs to work together.
* Write programs to handle text streams, because that is a universal interface.

The Unix philosophy favours composability. This is a system design principle that ensures that system components can be selected and assembled in various combinations to satisfy specific user requirements.

The essential features that make a component composable are that it be:

* **self-contained** (or **modular**)
It can be deployed independently – note that it may cooperate with other components, but dependent components are replaceable
 
* **stateless**
It treats each request as an independent transaction, unrelated to any previous request.

On composable systems it is easier to evaluate their individual parts adding to their trustworthiness.
	
You can read more about the Unix philosophy in the following link: https://catb.org/esr/writings/taoup/html/ch01s06.html