# 1.6 - The Open Source Initiative
----------------------------------

The Open Source Initiative (OSI) was founded by Bruce Perens and Eric S. Raymond in 1998. It was created as an umbrella organisation for open source software.

Although the idea behind is similar to the FSF it is different in some important parts. More software qualifies as open source than free software. Remember that some open source licences allow redistribution of modified versions as proprietary.

The OSI, like the FSF, keeps a list of licences that they consider Open Source. Some of the licences are both compatible with Free/Libre and Open Source Software, but some licences that are Open Source aren't Free/Libre Software.

**Free/Libre compatible and incompatible licences**
https://www.gnu.org/licenses/license-list.html

**OSI approved licences**
https://opensource.org/licenses/alphabetical


## The Open Source Philosophy
During the 1980s and 1990s the free software movement gain support in some circles, specially academia and hobbyists. Making inroads in business was proving more difficult.

Some businesses adopted open source software, but this was slow and minimal. Businesses distrusted software that was offered for free and worried about future liability.

Mainly the adoption was spearheaded by administrators that had small budgets and started installing Linux, Samba, Apache and other free software in order to save money compared with the commercial alternatives available at the time.

The FSF's advocacy is based on the moral imperative that all software should be free. This is appealing to some people, but businesses, specially the ones that make money off selling software would disagree. They would reject using free software as it clashed with their world-view.

This was one of the reasons why the OSI creators designed their organisation as a way to advocate free software. They coined the term Open Source and softened some of the FSF's imperatives. OSI aims to promote Open Source Software in the business world.

In the OSI's words:
>
	Open source enables a development method for software that harnesses the power of distributed peer review and transparency of process. The promise of open source is higher quality, better reliability, greater flexibility, lower cost, and an end to predatory vendor lock-in.

	https://opensource.org/about

As stated before, the main difference between the FSF and the OSI is the requirement by the GPL that derived works are also distributed under the GPL.

The OSI has certified many licences as Open Source but not all of them have this kind of restriction and therefore don't qualify as Free/Libre Software.

There is software that has been released with an Open Source licence and has been then moved into closed source products. macOS is one example of this.

The OSI doesn't oppose this as long as the licence originally used allows it. The FSF on the other side forbids this explicitly.

Ultimately, the OSI saw as a benefit that businesses adopted Open Source Software above said businesses adopting a FLOSS philosophy, taking a more pragmatic approach. 

Generally speaking free software is also open source software, but some FSF approved licences aren't recognised as Open Source by the OSI. Similarly, many Open Source licences don't qualify as Free/Libre Software.

Nowadays there is some tension between free software purists and the open source community although they share similar goals.

You have seen me use the FLOSS (Free/Libre Open Source Software) acronym before and this as umbrella definition that covers both types of software. You might see also the FOSS (Free Open Source Software) acronym, although this is being superseded by FLOSS.


## The Definition of Open Source Software
The open source definition is available in https://opensource.org/docs/osd

It is made of 10 principles originally derived from the Debian Free Software Guidelines. These 10 principles are summarised here: 

1. **Free redistribution**
The licence must permit redistribution, including redistribution as part of a larger work.

2. **Source code**
The program must include source code and permit redistribution of both source code and (if applicable) binary code.

3. **Derive works**
The licence must permit others to modify the software and to distribute such modifications under the same licence as the original. Note that the open source definition permits but does not require that the licence redistribution is made under the same original licence.

4. **Integrity of the author's source code**
The licence may restrict redistribution of modified source code, but only if patch files may be distributed along with the original source code. The licence may require that derived works change the software’s name or version number.

5. **No discrimination against persons or groups**
The licence must not discriminate against any person or group of people.

6. **No discrimination against fields of endeavour**
The licence must not forbid use of the program in any field, such as in business or by genetics researchers.

7. **Distribution of licence**
The licence must apply to anybody who receives the program without needing a separate agreement.

8. **Licence must not be specific to a product**
The licence must not require that the program be used or distributed as part of a larger program — that is, you may extract a single program from a larger collection and redistribute it alone.

9. **Licence must not restrict other software** The licence must not impose restrictions on other software that’s distributed along with the licenced software.

10. **Technology neutrality**
The licence must not be restricted based on specific technologies or interfaces.


The first three of these principles are the most important. At least to understand the point of open source technology.

The 10 principles have a resemblance to the FSF's four freedoms. There are, as it has been repeatedly pointed out, differences, specially in terms of licensing requirements for derived works.