# 1.3 - Open Source Principles
------------------------------

## Types of software

Software is distributed in different forms. Each way has its own expections on regards to payment, redistribution and user's rights.

We can divide software in some of the following categories:
    
* **Commercial software**
Individuals or companies develope commercial software with the intention of selling it for a profit. Commercial software source code is usually kept secret. Redistribution or copying of commercial software is generally illegal. Microsoft Windows and Microsoft Office are examples of commercial software.

**Shareware software**
Shareware software is very similar to commercial software. It is also copyrighted and the developer asks for payment. The main difference is the way it is distributed. You are allowed to try the software for free for a period of time, and even copy it, as long as after a the trial period expires you buy a license and don't distribute the licensed version. Shareware was very popular in the 1990's.

**Freeware**
Freeware is distributed without any payment expected by the author. Freeware software might be a basic version of a more fully featured program, or it can be bundled to promote another software. Freeware normally comes with no source code. Some examples of freeware are Adobe Reader, most of Windows drivers.
Please, note that freeware should not be confused with **free software**.

**Open Source Software**
Open Source Software is defined by 10 principles that are available at https://opensource.org/osd-annotated

The most important of these principles are _the right of the user to redistribute the program_, _the availability of source code_, and _the right of the user to make and distribute changed versions of the program_.

These principles mean that users can modify open source programs to suit their own needs. This can even be in ways or purposes that the original author doesn’t support.

The major difference with Free Software is that some Open Source licenses, like the BSD licence, allow redistribution of modified works under a different licence. This means that a modified version of an open source program could be redistributed as closed source.

**Free/Libre Software**
Superficially Free/Libre software seems very similar to Open Source software.

We will look into this licence in more detail later, but the main difference with Open Source is that redistribution of modified versions of  Free/Libre Software have to distributed under the same licence. 


There are more types of software beyond these categories. Also some that might be a mix of the above that don't fit in the above categories.

The Free Software Foundation keeps a list of licences indicating which ones are Free/Libre:

https://www.gnu.org/licenses/license-list.html

The Open Source Initiative does keep a list of licences that are Open Source:

https://opensource.org/licenses


If you want to learn more about different types of Free/Libre and Open Source licences you can read this book:

https://people.debian.org/~dktrkranz/legal/Understanding%20Open%20Source%20and%20Free%20Software%20Licensing.pdf


## Characteristics of Open Source software

The argument in favour of Open Source software is that that software that is developed in an open manner is likely to be superior to software developed as closed source.

This is argument in favour (or against it depending of your point of view) are:

* **Better code**
Exposing the source code allows the community to review and improve it. This might not be necessarily true for smaller projects if they aren't actively reviewed by other programmers.

* **Flexibility**
Having access to the source code allows users to modify and customise the software. Rather than having a program nearly do what the user needs from it, it can be modified so it does exactly what the user wants. It can be argued that this benefit is only available to those with the skill, time or money to modify or able to hire someone to modify the software.

* **Lower cost**
The open source and free software definition allows the selling of software, algthough due to how it is distributed it tends to be available for free (as in no money paid). However, there are services associated with using FLOSS (Free/Libre Open Source Software), like support, consultancy and others that need to be taken into consideration.

* **No vendor lock-in**
Proprietary software can make it difficult for products of the competition by using closed file formats and by not playing nice with open standards or products. FLOSS products can be forked and/or modified to support additional file formats, protocols or standards.

The FLOSS community would argue that the above points are all in favour of using FLOSS, where the disadvantages are small compared to the loss of freedoms you get.

Ultimately this is a matter of opinion and you should reach your own conclusions. Pointless to say, that this course is about using FLOSS so there is certainly a bias in favour of it.