# 1.5 - The Free Software Foundation
------------------------------------

## The Free Software Foundation
The Free Software Foundation (FSF) is of great importance in the FLOSS community. It was founded in October 1985 by Richard Stallman to support the free software movement and the GNU (GNU's Not Unix) project.

The GNU project aims to provide computer users freedom and control in their use of their computers and computing devices by collaboratively developing and publishing free software under their GPL licence.

The GPL licence is the manifestation of FSF's philosophy.

## Understanding the FSF Philosophy
The FSF advocates Free Software. Free as in freedom (not as in beer). Free Software defined by the FSF states what you are allowed to do with the software.

Free software is different from freeware. Freeware is software that's free of charge (gratis), but not free as in freedom (free/libre).

The FSF defines four specific software freedoms:

  0. The freedom to run the program as you wish, for any purpose. 

  1. The freedom to study how the program works, and change it so it does your computing as you wish. Access to the source code is a precondition for this. 

  2. The freedom to redistribute copies so you can help your neighbour. 

  3. The freedom to distribute copies of your modified versions to others.

More information is available in:

https://www.gnu.org/philosophy/free-sw.html.en

These freedoms are similar to the OSI principles but there are some important differences in interpretation.

By FSF standards all software in the world would be free following the above four freedoms. Some Linux distributions are completely free but some distributions include proprietary software. For example some vendors don't publish the source code for their drivers. In some cases, a part of the distro is propietary to limit redistribution without charging.

Free Software isn't necessarily free of charge and the four freedoms don't limit the possibility of selling it for a fee, but free software's price tends to be zero. The problem with propietary software isn't about the cost, but how it restricts its redistribution.

The takeaway about software freedom is that it empowers users, not just developers or companies. If you can modify a program that nearly does what you need it to do, to exactly do what you want it gives it an enormous advantage over a propietary version.

By then distributing your modified version you can help others that had the same problem. The application of the FSF philosophy has a benefit for the wider community.

The FSF licences have sometimes been called copyleft. This is a wordplay with copyright. Where copyright restricts the usage rights, copyleft widens them. Copyleft provides provisions meant to guarantee the freedom of users to copy software, rather than restrict it.

## The General Public Licence (GPL)
The legal expresion of the principles of the FSF are written in the GPL. Two versions of the GPL are the most common, versions 2 and 3.

Both versions apply the four freedoms. They also make explicit an implication of those four freedoms by stating that any derivative work has to be released under the same GPL licence.

This is meant to stop a company or individual from appropriating a program released as free software. For example, many companies contribute to the Linux kernel by providing patches or bug fixes. No company could redistribute their modified versions without also sharing the source code. Whatever patches or bug fixes they have applied would be shared if they were to redistribute their kernel version.

Please note that it is perfectly fine to make modifications to free software and not share it as long as it is not distributed. Google and Amazon have their own versions of Linux that they use internally and that aren't distributed.

Also it is important to note that in a Linux distro there will be a collection of different programs, each one with their own individual licence. Some programs will be GPL, version 2 or 3, others might have an Open Source licence and others might have a proprietary one. No one licence takes priority over the others and applies to each individual program. 

GPL version 2 (or GPLv2 for short) was released in 1991. GPLv3 was released in 2007 with the intention of closing what the FSF viewed as loopholes in the GPLv2. GPLv3 contains clauses intended to combat use of hardware restrictions that limit the four freedoms and to address issues related to software patents.

The most clear example of what the GPLv3 tried to address were hardware limitations that Tivo applied so no kernel versions that the ones they create themselves can be installed on their hardware. Android is another example of this situation. GPLv3 tries to limit this.

Some programs have upgraded their licence to GPLv3 while others have remained on GPLv2. The most noticeable is the Linux kernel that is released under GPLv2. This is quite important as it allows the Linux kernel to be used by devices that are otherwise fairly closed. Many of such devices use restrictive boot processes to prevent unauthorized kernels from booting.

## The Lesser General Public Licence
The Lesser GPL or LGPL is a variant of the GPL licence.

Developers have to use libraries regularly. Libraries are collections of code that are shared with other programs. For example, in Linux (and other Operating Systems) libraries provide common features like creating menus or displaying windows. All GUI applications use these features and developers use them so they don't need to rewrite code for shared features. It has also the advantage of reducing the size of programs.

The LGPL is often applied to libraries because the GPL wording would require that all programs that were to use a GPL library to be released also as GPL.

The LGPL allows programs that use a library to be released under a different licence, even a commercial one.

## The GNU Free Documentation Licence (GFDL)
The GFDL is meant to be used for documentation rather than software.

The GPL was written with software in mind so its wording doesn't fit static documents. The GFDL fills this need.

Many projects of the Wikimedia Foundation, including Wikipedia use the GFDL in conjuction with Creative Commons.

## Further reading
There are other types of licences like Creative Commons that aren't discussed here. You can read more in the following links.

_Understanding Open Source and Free Software Licensing_ by **Andrew M. St. Laurent** 
https://people.debian.org/~dktrkranz/legal/Understanding%20Open%20Source%20and%20Free%20Software%20Licensing.pdf

_Free as in Freedom_ by **Sam Williams**, O'Reilly Media, Inc., March 2002, ISBN 9780596002879
http://gutenberg.org/ebooks/5768