# 2.4.0 - Getting help

## man

We have seen that Linux comes with a lot of commands built in. It isn't realistic to expect anyone to remember all of the commands and all of their individual options.

Linux and Unix systems come with a set of reference manuals, and usually if a new command is installed it will at the time of installation add its own manuals to the system.

**man** stands for _manual_ and it is a program that acts as an interface for those system reference manuals.

**man** requires an argument, the name of the command you want information of.

For example, let's get some information about the **ls** command.

```text
$ man ls
LS(1)                                                      User Commands                                                      LS(1)

NAME
       ls - list directory contents

SYNOPSIS
       ls [OPTION]... [FILE]...
```

You can use the arrow keys and scroll buttons \(or space bar\) to explore the manual entry for **ls**.

Have a look around and once you are finished press **q** to **q**uit.

We need to look two aspects of **man**. First, how we call the program, as in how we query help for specific commands. Second, how we navigate through the interface.

Let's look at the first part. The syntax is the same as the first example:

```text
man command_name
```

**man -f** _**page**_ \(whatis\)

**man -k** _**search\_term**_ \(apropos\)

man command \[-x\] {on\|off} filename …

```text
-Anything between square brackets [] is optional.
-Anything followed by an ellipsis … can be repeated
-Curly braces {} mean that you should select one of the items separated by |
```

1 Executable programs or shell commands 2 System calls \(functions provided by the kernel\) 3 Library calls \(functions within program libraries\) 4 Special files \(usually found in /dev\) 5 File formats and conventions, e.g. /etc/passwd 6 Games 7 Miscellaneous \(including macro packages and conventions\), e.g. man\(7\), groff\(7\) 8 System administration commands \(usually only for root\) 9 Kernel routines \[Non standard\]

info ? Displays help information N Moves to the next node P Moves back to the previous node U Moves up in the hierarchy L Display the last info page read T Top page for the topic Q Quit

apropos \(man -k\)

whatis

A complete set of online man pages for different variants of Unix and Linux can be found at the FreeBSD documentation project: freebsd.org/cgi/man.cgi

