# 1.0 Introduction

## NOTICE

**THIS IS A WORK IN PROGRESS.** Updates are done frequently and new material is added as often as possible. There are going to be spelling mistakes, editing work and other changes before all the course parts are completed. Currently the focus is on adding all the material before editing and correcting.

This notice will remain until the course is complete.

Any and all feedback is appreciated.

## 1.0 - Introduction

There are many tutorials and introductions to the Linux/Unix command line. Some of them focus on a basic set of commands or on the concepts needed to pass a certification.

I like it when the focus is on the practical side of learning. What can be effectively be applied at work.

The selection I have made covers areas and commands that any Linux user or sysadmin will use on a daily basis. You can see them as the building blocks for more advanced knowledge.

The first part covers some theory that will allow you to understand what Linux is and the philosophy behind it. It isn't compulsory to learn about it but it will help you better understand what the design principles and why certain things are done in a certain way.

I have tried to ensure that all the chapters build on top of the previous ones. If I introduce a concept that relies on some other knowledge, this will have already been presented in a previous chapter.

My preference is for the knowledge to be introduced in a natural way, setting the base and groundwork upon which to build from. If you are new to Linux following it in order will yield the maximum benefit.

### A note on console fonts

Consoles are configured by default with mono-space fonts and that have clear and distinctive fonts.

The reason for this is that some characters with certain fonts are difficult to distinguish.

The clearest example are 1, I, l, 0 and O.

If this document has been rendered in a way that you can't differentiate between the above characters please get an updated version or go to the course's website to get it in a different format:

[https://github.com/dpoves/Linux-CLI-intro](https://github.com/dpoves/Linux-CLI-intro)

### Getting in touch

If you want to get in touch you can reach me via the following.

**Technical Blog** [https://pov.es](https://pov.es)

**GitHub** [https://github.com/dpoves](https://github.com/dpoves)

Any feedback is appreciated. If you find any typos, feel that certain sections aren't clear enough or find any mistakes, please let me me know.

I hope you find the course useful!

